feat(devfile): New post on devfile V2 and IDE plug-ins (#2)
eclipse-che/blog: _posts/2021-06-23-devfile-v2-and-ide-plugins.md

---
title: Devfile v2 and IDE plug-ins
layout: post
author: Florent Benoit
description: >-

>   How are handle IDE plug-ins with devfile v2

Reviewer: maybe? 
```suggestion
  How are IDE plug-ins handled with devfile v2
```

DevWorkspaces are custom kubernetes resources and can be created/listed/deleted using kubernetes tools like `kubectl`.

A devWorkspace is a workspace using the new engine and supporting devfile V2 definition.

### Milestones

Devfile v2 support in Eclipse Che can be followed by milestones.

*   [Milestone 1](https://github.com/eclipse/che/milestone/136) introduced the first support of devfile v2 (start a basic workspace)
*   [Milestone 2](https://github.com/eclipse/che/milestone/139) just landed in Eclipse Che 7.32.0 with the support of Theia plug-ins for DevWorkspaces
*   [Milestone 3](https://github.com/eclipse/che/milestone/140) is the next target, including Kubernetes support and more.

### How to test ?

The support of devfile v2/devWorkspaces is optional and need to be opt-in.  

When the support is enabled, both devfile v1 and v2 are supported. You can still work with your previous workspaces and devfile v1.

* If the `devfile.yaml` has `apiVersion 1.0.0`, it will use che server workspace engine to deploy this devfile.
* If the `devfile.yaml` has `schemaVersion 2.0.0` (or greater like `2.1.0`), it will use the devWorkspace controller to deploy this devfile.

> ⚠️ DevWorkspaces requires Openshift as platform until Milestone 3 is reached (no support of plain Kubernetes yet)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
⚠️ DevWorkspaces requires OpenShift as platform until Milestone 3 is reached (no support of plain Kubernetes yet)
```

Author: thx @ibuziuk

ℹ️ Enabling devWorkspace is also defaulting installation to use single-host deployment. So no need to install certificates on your computer.

> To enable devWorkspace, it uses a custom spec object for Che Operator:  

Reviewer: maybe it would make sense to capitalize `devWorkspace` for consistency? I noticed that in the blog post both variants are mixed  devWorkspace / DevWorkspaces

Author: I think I used capital letter when starting a new sentence

Author: I'll switch to `DevWorkspace` everywhere

#### Prebuilt DevWorkspace templates

Today, the flow is the following with devfile v1: user pickup a getting started, then dashboard fetches the devfile then plug-in broker will analyze the devfile.yaml and fetch content from linked plug-in registries, parse the meta.yaml of these plug-ins to find sidecar definition, and then at the end some containers are added.

With devfile v2, there is still these kind of steps where a lot of yaml/json files are fetched, analyzed to result at the end in a set of DevWorkspace templates.

The Che-Theia library allows to generate a single yaml file with all the analysis being done offline.

npx @eclipse-che/che-theia-devworkspace-handler --devfile-url:[https://github.com/che-samples/spring-petclinic/tree/devfilev2](https://github.com/che-samples/spring-petclinic/tree/devfilev2) --output-file:$(pwd)/all-in-one.yaml

Then this file can be used directly by `kubectl` :

`kubectl apply -f all-in-one.yaml -n my-namespace`

These templates can be stored in the devfile registry so Eclipse Che dashboard could directly use this content instead of processing at every click the full analysis.

### Plug-in registry changes

> For the workspaces using devfile v1, Eclipse Che server fetches meta.yaml files from the plug-in registry. There are some limitations, for example defining plug-in preferences is only possible if there is a sidecar being defined, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For workspaces using Devfile v1, Eclipse Che server fetches a `meta.yaml` files from the plug-in registry. There are some limitations, for example defining plug-in preferences is only possible if there is a sidecar being defined, etc.
```

> With DevWorkspaces, the plug-in registry export now the content provided in different formats. It still export meta.yaml but it also expose devfile.yaml files for Eclipse Che editors definition and for some plug-ins that are not IDE plug-ins like che-machine-exec (library to be able connect to a specific container in a workspace/pod).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With DevWorkspaces, the plug-in registry export now the content provided in different formats. It still exports `meta.yaml` files but it also exposes `devfile.yaml` files for Eclipse Che editors definition and for some plug-ins that are not IDE plug-ins like che-machine-exec (library to be able connect to a specific container in a workspace/pod).
```

> Also the Che-Theia IDE plug-ins are now exposed by their che-theia-plugin.yaml fragment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also the Che-Theia IDE plug-ins are now exposed by their `che-theia-plugin.yaml` fragment.
```

Every Che-Theia plug-in fragment is generated from the [che-theia-plugins.yaml file](https://github.com/eclipse-che/che-plugin-registry/blob/main/che-theia-plugins.yaml).

An hosted version of the che-plugin-registry is available after each commit at [https://eclipse-che.github.io/che-plugin-registry/main](https://eclipse-che.github.io/che-plugin-registry/main)

Corresponding definition for`redhat/java` IDE plug-in is available at:

[https://eclipse-che.github.io/che-plugin-registry/main/v3/plugins/redhat/java/latest/che-theia-plugin.yaml](https://eclipse-che.github.io/che-plugin-registry/main/v3/plugins/redhat/java/latest/che-theia-plugin.yaml)

> It references the dependencies of this IDE plug-in and the preferences (so .vsix are not grouped directly in the meta.yaml file)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It references the dependencies of this IDE plug-in and its preferences (whereas with `meta.yaml` the notion of dependency didn't exist and all the required `.vsix` had to be specified in the file)
```

```yaml
preferences:  
  java.server.launchMode: Standard  
dependencies:  
  - vscjava/vscode-java-debug  
  - vscjava/vscode-java-test
```

### Eclipse Che Devfile registry changes

> The index of the devfile registry is providing a list of devfiles to use. But now, with devfile V2 as some other optional files may be required, it’s better to reference a repository rather than a devfile.yaml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The index of the Devfile registry is providing a list of Devfiles to use. But now, Devfile v2 as some other optional files may be required, it’s better to reference a repository rather than a single `devfile.yaml`.
```

> New links are available in the devfile registry. The `v2` links are links to either repositories or devfiles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
New links are available in the Devfile registry. The `v2` links are links to either repositories or devfiles.
```

> example of index of the devfile-registry:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is an example of a minimal index of a Devfile registry:
```

```json
{
  "displayName": "Java Spring Boot",
  "icon": "/images/springboot.svg",
  "links": {
    "v2": "https://github.com/che-samples/java-spring-petclinic/tree/devfilev2",
    "self": "/devfiles/java-web-spring/devfile.yaml"
  }
}
```

> By enabling DevWorkspaces on Eclipse Che and if there are some v2 links in the devfile registry, the dashboard will only display Devfile v2 getting started (no devfile v1 getting started). Each of these samples will use the new DevWorkspace engine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the DevWorkspaces is enabled and there are some v2 links in the Devfile registry, only Devfile v2 getting started will be shown on the Dashboard (Devfile v1 getting started will be hided). Each of these samples will use the new DevWorkspace engine.
```

![Getting Started]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/devfile-v2-and-ide-plugins/dashboard-getting-started.png)

> There is ongoing work to merge Che Devfile registry and [Community Devfile registry](https://registry.devfile.io) endorsed by [devfile organization](https://github.com/devfile/registry).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to those changes, there is an ongoing effort to merge Che Devfile registry and [community Devfile registry](https://registry.devfile.io). This work is part of the [Devfile project](https://github.com/devfile/registry) that is planned to become [a CNCF sandbox project](https://github.com/devfile/api/issues/426).
```
